The Colony of Singapore was a Crown colony of the United Kingdom that
encompassed what is modern-day Singapore from 1946 to 1958. During this
period, Christmas Island, the Cocos (Keeling) Islands, and Labuan were also
administered from Singapore. Singapore had previously been established as a
British colony since 1824, and had been governed as part of the Straits
Settlements since 1826. The colony was created when the Straits Settlements
was dissolved shortly after the Japanese occupation of Singapore ended in
1945. The power of the British Government was vested in the governor of
Singapore. The colony eventually gained partial internal self-governance in
1955, and lasted until the establishment of the State of Singapore in 1958,
with full internal self-governance granted in 1959. After a few years of self-
governance, Singapore went on to merge with Malaya, Sarawak and North Borneo
(Sabah) to form Malaysia on 16 September 1963, thereby completely ending 144
years of British rule in Singapore. Due to differing views in dealing with
political, economic and racial issues, Singapore would eventually cease to be
a part of Malaysia and become an independent sovereign country on 9 August
1965. History Post war period: return of British rule After Japan surrendered
to the Allies on 15 August 1945, there was a state of anomie in Singapore, as
the British had not yet arrived to take control, while the Japanese occupiers
had a considerably weakened hold over the populace. Incidents of looting and
revenge killing were widespread. When British troops returned to Singapore in
September 1945, thousands of Singaporeans lined the streets to cheer them.
Singapore was ruled by a British Military Administration (BMA) between
September 1945 and March 1946, during which it also served as the headquarters
of the British governor-general for Southeast Asia. However, much of the
infrastructure had been destroyed, including electricity and water supply
systems, telephone services, and the harbour facilities at the Port of
Singapore. There was also a shortage of food, including rice, and this led to
malnutrition, disease, and rampant crime and violence. Unemployment, high food
prices, and workers' discontent culminated in a series of strikes in 1947
causing massive stoppages in public transport and other services. By late 1947
the economy began to recover, facilitated by the growing demand for tin and
rubber around the world. Several more years elapsed before the economy
returned to pre-war levels. From colony to state On 1 April 1946, the Straits
Settlements was dissolved and Singapore became a Crown Colony with a civil
administration headed by a Governor and separated from peninsular Malaya. In
July 1947, separate Executive and Legislative Councils were established and
provisions were made to allow for the election of six members of the
Legislative Council the next year. On 30 November 1959, the Singapore State
Arms and Flag and National Anthem Ordinance 1959 was passed to regulate the
use and display of the State Arms, State Flag and the performance of the
National Anthem. Merger with Malaysia The failure of the British to defend
Singapore had destroyed their credibility as infallible rulers in the eyes of
the locals in Singapore. The decades after and during the war saw a political
awakening amongst the local populace and the rise of nationalist and anti-
colonial sentiments, including a cry for Merdeka ("independence" in the Malay
language). The British were also prepared to embark on a program of gradually
increasing self-governance for Singapore and Malaya. On 16 September 1963,
Singapore became a state of Malaysia, completely ending 144 years of British
rule. Independence On 9 August 1965, Singapore officially left Malaysia to
become the independent Republic of Singapore, due to political, economic and
racial disputes. Government First Legislative Council (1948–1951) The first
Singaporean elections, held in March 1948 to select members of the Legislative
Council, were rather limited. The right to vote was restricted to adult
British subjects, of which only 23,000 or about 10 percent of those eligible
registered to vote. In addition, only six of the twenty-five seats on the
Legislative Council were to be elected; the rest were chosen either by the
Governor or by the chambers of commerce. Three of the elected seats were won
by a newly formed Singapore Progressive Party (SPP), a conservative party
whose leaders were businessmen and professionals and were disinclined to press
for immediate self-rule. The other three seats were won by independents. Three
months after the elections, an armed insurgency by communist groups in Malaya
– the Malayan Emergency – broke out, and the British imposed harsh measures to
control left-wing groups in both Singapore and Malaya; the controversial
Internal Security Act, which allowed indefinite detention without trial for
persons suspected of being "threats to security", was introduced at this time.
Since the left-wing groups were the strongest critics of the colonial system,
progress on self-government stalled for several years. The colonial government
also tried to prevent contacts between Singaporean Chinese and China, which
had just fallen under the rule of the Chinese Communist Party. Tan Kah Kee, a
local businessman and philanthropist, was denied re-entry into Singapore after
he made a trip to China. Second Legislative Council (1951–1955) A second
Legislative Council election was held in 1951 with the number of elected seats
increased to nine. This election was again dominated by the SPP which won six
seats. This slowly contributed to the formation of a distinct government of
Singapore, although colonial administration was still dominant. In 1953, with
the communists in Malaya suppressed and the worst of the 'Emergency' period
over, the government appointed a commission, headed by Sir George Rendel, to
study the possibility of self-government for Singapore. The commission
proposed a limited form of self-government. The Legislative Assembly with
twenty-five out of thirty-two seats chosen by popular election would replace
the Legislative Council, from which a Chief Minister as head of government and
Council of Ministers as a cabinet would be picked under a parliamentary
system. The British would retain control over areas such as internal security
and foreign affairs, as well as veto power over legislation. The government
agreed with the recommendations, and Legislative Assembly elections were
scheduled for 2 April 1955. The election was a lively and closely fought
affair, with several newly formed political parties joining the fray. In
contrast to previous elections, voters were automatically registered,
expanding the electorate to around 300,000. The SPP was soundly defeated in
the election, winning only four seats. The newly formed, left-leaning Labour
Front was the largest winner with ten seats and was able to form a coalition
government with the UMNO-MCA-MU, which won three seats. Another new party, the
then leftist People's Action Party (PAP), won three seats. Administration On 1
April 1946, the Colony of Singapore was formed with Cocos-Keeling, Christmas
Island after the dissolution of the Straits Settlements. As a Crown colony,
Singapore inherited the hierarchical organisational structure of the Straits
Settlements government with a governor, who was assisted by an Advisory
Executive Council, a Legislative Council and a Municipal Council. In July
1946, Labuan became part of the Crown Colony of North Borneo. The sovereignty
of the Cocos (Keeling) Islands was transferred to Australia in 1955. The
administration of Christmas Island was also transferred to Australia in 1958.
Governors of Singapore (1946–1959) The Governors of Singapore ruled the Crown
Colony of Singapore from 1946 to 1959, on behalf of the Colonial Office. When
Singapore gained self-governance in 1959, the Office of the Governor was
abolished. Bose, Romen, "THE END OF THE WAR: The Liberation of Singapore and
the aftermath of the Second World War", Marshall Cavendish, Singapore, 2005
Notes == References ==

