Syonan (Japanese: 昭南, Hepburn: Shōnan, Kunrei-shiki: Syônan), officially
Syonan Island (Japanese: 昭南島, Hepburn: Shōnan-tō, Kunrei-shiki: Syônan-tô),
was the name for Singapore when it was occupied and ruled by the Empire of
Japan, following the fall and surrender of British military forces on 15
February 1942 during World War II. Japanese military forces occupied it after
defeating the combined British, Indian, Australian, Malayan and the Straits
Settlements garrison in the Battle of Singapore. The occupation was to become
a major turning point in the histories of several nations, including those of
Japan, Britain, and Singapore. Singapore was renamed Syonan-to, meaning "Light
of the South Island" and was also included as part of the Greater East Asia
Co-Prosperity Sphere (Japanese: 大東亜共栄圏, Hepburn: Dai Tōa Kyōeiken). Singapore
was officially returned to British colonial rule on 12 September 1945,
following the formal signing of the surrender at the Municipal Building,
currently known as City Hall. After the return of the British, there was
growing political sentiments amongst the local populace in tandem with the
rise of anti-colonial and nationalist fervor, as many felt that the British
were no longer competent with the administration and defence of the crown
colony and its inhabitants. Shortly after the war, the Straits Settlements was
dissolved and Singapore became a separate crown colony in 1946. It would go on
to achieve self-governance in 1959 and join with Malaya to form Malaysia in
1963, before becoming a sovereign city-state a few years later in 1965. The
day of the surrender of the British to the Japanese in 1942 continues to be
commemorated in Singapore with Total Defence Day, which is marked annually on
15 February. Events leading to the occupation On 8 December 1941, Singapore
was hit by the first Japanese bombs. After the air strike, the Japanese forces
focused their invasion on Malaya (present-day Peninsular Malaysia). During
that time, the people in Malaya and Singapore thought the British rulers could
defend them. However, the Japanese had soldiers well-trained in jungle
warfare. They used light tanks and bicycles to move quickly through the
jungle. As a result, they managed to capture Malaya within 55 days. By 31
January 1942, the Japanese forces had captured Johor Bahru. The British forces
retreated from Malaya to Singapore. They then blew up the Johor-Singapore
Causeway, which linked Malaya and Singapore. They wanted to delay the Japanese
forces from entering Singapore. The British plan for the defense of Singapore
was to guard against attacks from the sea so they put up coastal defenses
guarding the southern coastline of Singapore. However, the Japanese forces
entered Singapore via the northwestern coastline. On 7 February 1942, the
Japanese forces attacked Pulau Ubin to mislead the British forces into
thinking that they would attack Singapore from the northeast, and the British
concentrated their forces on the north-eastern side of Singapore, and
distributed the rest of their troops across the island. The very next day, The
Japanese forces made use of boats to cross the Straits of Johor. On 9 February
1942, The Japanese forces repaired the Causeway, which had been blown up by
the British forces and crossed into Singapore. 2 days later, the Japanese
forces reached a reservoir in Bukit Timah. This was also where the British
kept their food and weapons. Fierce fighting took place, with Chinese
volunteers and British forces fighting against the Japanese forces. In the
end, the British forces lost the battle. Many soldiers were killed on both
sides. On 12 February, the Japanese forces attacked Fort Siloso at Sentosa.
The British forces sank one of the Japanese ships. The next day, a fierce
battle took place between the British forces and the Japanese forces at Pasir
Panjang, where the British forces kept their military stores. Fighting
alongside the British were soldiers from the Malay Regiment. They were led by
Lieutenant Adnan bin Saidi who died in the battle. The next day, Japanese
soldiers charged into the Alexandra Military Hospital (present-day Alexandra
Hospital), where they killed more than 200 hospital staff and patients. The
British decided to surrender. The supplies of water, food and ammunition were
running out, and the soldiers were tired. The British wanted to prevent more
deaths. On the evening of 15 February 1942, Lieutenant-General Arthur Ernest
Percival, the leader of the British forces in Singapore, met Lieutenant-
General Tomoyuki Yamashita, the leader of the Japanese forces tasked to
capture Malaya and Singapore. At the meeting, the British forces surrendered
Singapore to the Japanese forces. Life during the occupation Time of mass-
terror The main army which took Malaya, the 25th Army, was redeployed to other
fronts such as the Philippines and New Guinea shortly after the fall of
Singapore. The Kempeitai (the Japanese military police), which was the
dominant occupation unit in Singapore, committed numerous atrocities towards
the common people. They introduced the system of "Sook Ching", meaning
"purging through purification" in Chinese, to get rid of those, especially
ethnic Chinese, deemed to be hostile to the Empire of Japan (anti-Japanese
elements in the local population). The Sook Ching massacres claimed the lives
of between 25,000 and 55,000 ethnic Chinese in Singapore as well as in
neighboring Malaya. These victims, mainly males between the ages of 18 and 50,
were rounded up and taken to deserted spots and remote locations around the
island, such as Changi Beach, Punggol Point, and Siglap, and killed
systematically using machine guns and rifles. Moreover, the Kempeitai
established an island-wide network of local informants to help them identify
those they suspected as anti-Japanese. These informers were well-paid by the
Kempeitai and had no fear of being arrested for their loyalty was not in
question to the occupation forces. These informers worked at Kempeitai
screening centres where the Japanese attempted to single out anti-Japanese
elements for execution. Japanese soldiers and Kempeitai officers patrolled the
streets often and all commoners had to bow to them with respect when they
passed by. Those who failed to do so would be slapped, punched, beaten and
some people would even be taken away to imprisonment or even face execution.
Other changes to life in Singapore To discourage Western influence, which
Japan sought to eliminate from the very start of their invasion, the Japanese
set up schools and education institutions and pressured the local people to
learn their language (Japanese). Textbooks and language guidebooks were
printed in Japanese and radios and movies were broadcast and screened in
Japanese. Every morning, school-children had to stand facing the direction of
Japan (in the case of Singapore, looking northeast) and sing the Japanese
national anthem ("Kimigayo"). Japanese propaganda banners and posters also
went up all around Singapore, as did many Japanese Rising Sun flags raised and
hung across many major buildings. Scarcity of basic needs Basic resources,
ranging from food to medication, were scarce during the occupation. The prices
of basic necessities increased drastically over the three and a half years due
to hyperinflation. For example, the price of rice increased from $5 per 100
catties (about 60 kg or 130 lb) to $5,000 by the end of the occupation between
August and September 1945. The Japanese issued ration cards, also known as
"Peace Living Certificates", which were very precious to the people at that
time, to limit the amount of resources distributed to the civilian population.
Adults could purchase 5 kg (11 lb) of rice per month and children received 2
kg (4.4 lb) accordingly. The amount of rice for adults was reduced by 25% as
the war progressed, as much of the scarce rice supplies were sent to feed the
Japanese military. The Japanese issued "Banana Money" (so referred to due to
the image of a banana tree printed on most of such notes of the currency) as
their main currency during the occupation period since British Straits
currency became rarer and was subsequently phased out when the Japanese took
over in 1942. They instituted elements of a command economy in which there
were restrictions on the demand and supply of resources, thus creating a
popular black market from which the locals could obtain key scarce resources
such as rice, meat, and medicine. The "Banana" currency started to suffer from
high inflation and dropped drastically in value because the occupation
authorities would simply print more whenever they needed it; consequently on
the black market, Straits currency was more widely used. Food availability and
quality decreased greatly. Sweet potatoes, tapiocas and yams became the staple
food of most diets of many Singaporeans because they were considerably cheaper
than rice and could also be grown fast and easily in backyard gardens. They
were then turned into a variety of dishes, as both desserts and all three
meals of the day. Such foods helped to fend starvation off, with limited
success in terms of nutrients gained, and new ways of consuming sweet
potatoes, tapiocas and yams with other products were regularly invented and
created to help stave off the monotony. Both the British colonial and Japanese
occupation authorities encouraged their local population to grow their own
food even if they had the smallest amount of land. The encouragement and
production were similar to what occurred with "Victory Gardens" in Western
nations (predominantly in Europe) during World War II as food supplies grew
ever scarcer. Ipomoea aquatica, which grew relatively easily and flourished
relatively well near water sources, became a popular food-crop just as it did
the other vegetables. Education After taking Singapore, the Japanese
established the Shonan Japanese School (昭南日本学園, Shōnan Nihon Gakuen), to
educate the Malays, Chinese, Indians, and Eurasians in the Japanese language.
Faye Yuan Kleeman, the author of Under an Imperial Sun: Japanese Colonial
Literature of Taiwan and the South wrote that it was the most successful of
such schools in Southeast Asia. During the occupation, the Japanese had also
opened the Shonan First People's School. Allied attacks Singapore was the
target of various operations masterminded by Allied forces to disrupt Japanese
military activities. On 26 September 1943, an Allied commando unit known as Z
Force led by Major Ivan Lyon infiltrated Singapore Harbour and sank or damaged
seven Japanese ships comprising over 39,000 long tons (40,000 metric tons).
Lyon led another operation, codenamed "Rimau", with the same objective almost
a year later and sank three ships. Lyon and 13 of his men were killed fighting
the Japanese during this operation. The other 10 men who participated in the
operation were captured, charged with espionage in a kangaroo court and
subsequently executed. Lim Bo Seng of Force 136 led another operation, code-
named Gustavus, he recruited and trained hundreds of secret agents through
intensive military intelligence missions from China and India. He set up the
Sino-British guerrilla task force Force 136 in 1942 with Captain John Davis of
the Special Operations Executive (SOE). Operation Gustavus was aimed at
establishing an espionage network in Malaya and Singapore to gather
intelligence about Japanese activities, and thereby aid the British in
Operation Zipper – the code name for their plan to take back Singapore from
the Japanese. Force 136 was eventually disbanded after the war. In August
1945, two XE class midget submarines of the Royal Navy took part in Operation
Struggle, a plan to infiltrate Singapore Harbour and sabotage the Japanese
cruisers Takao and Myōkō using limpet mines. They inflicted heavy damage on
Takao, earning Lieutenant Ian Edward Fraser the Victoria Cross. From November
1944 to May 1945, Singapore was subjected to air raids by British and American
long-range bomber units. Naval facilities and docks in Singapore were also
bombed on eleven occasions by American air units between November 1944 and May
1945. These attacks caused some damage to their targets but also killed a
number of civilians. Most Singaporeans, however, welcomed the raids as they
were seen as heralding Singapore's liberation from Japanese rule. End of the
occupation On 6 August 1945, the United States detonated an atomic bomb over
the Japanese city of Hiroshima. Sixteen hours later, US President Harry S.
Truman called again for Japan's surrender and warned it to "expect a rain of
ruin from the air, the like of which has never been seen on this earth." On 8
August 1945, the Soviet Union declared war on Japan and the next day invaded
the Japanese puppet state of Manchukuo. Later that day, the United States
dropped a second atomic bomb, this time on the Japanese city of Nagasaki.
Following those events, Emperor Hirohito intervened and ordered the Supreme
Council for the Direction of the War to accept the terms the Allies had set
down in the Potsdam Declaration to end the war. After several more days of
behind-the-scenes negotiations and a failed coup d'état, Emperor Hirohito gave
a recorded radio address across the Empire on 15 August. In the radio address,
he announced the surrender of Japan to the Allies. The surrender ceremony was
held on 2 September aboard the United States Navy battleship USS Missouri at
which officials from the Japanese government signed the Japanese Instrument of
Surrender, thereby ending the hostilities. On 12 September 1945, a surrender
instrument was signed at the Singapore Municipal Building. That was followed
by a celebration at the Padang, which included a victory parade. Lord Louis
Mountbatten, Supreme Allied Commander of South East Asia Command, came to
Singapore to receive the formal surrender of the Japanese forces in the region
from General Seishirō Itagaki on behalf of Field Marshal Hisaichi Terauchi. A
British military administration, using surrendered Japanese troops as security
forces, was formed to govern the island until March 1946. After the Japanese
surrendered, there was a state of instability (anomie) in Singapore, as the
British had not yet arrived to take control. The Japanese occupiers had a
considerably weakened hold over the populace. There were widespread incidents
of looting and revenge killing. Much of the infrastructure had been wrecked,
including the harbour facilities and the electricity, water supply and
telephone services. It took four or five years for the economy to return to
prewar levels. When British troops finally arrived, they were met with
cheering and fanfare. Banana money became worthless after the occupation
ended. Memorials To keep alive the memory of the Japanese occupation and its
lessons learned for future generations, the Singapore government erected
several memorials with some at the former massacre sites: Civilian War
Memorial Spearheaded and managed by the Singapore Chinese Chamber of Commerce
and Industry, the Civilian War Memorial is located in the War Memorial Park at
Beach Road. Comprising four white concrete columns, this 61-meter-tall
memorial commemorates the civilian dead of all races. It was built after
thousands of remains were discovered all over Singapore during the urban
redevelopment boom in the early 1960s. The memorial was officially unveiled by
Singapore's first prime minister Lee Kuan Yew on the 25th anniversary of the
start of the Japanese occupation in 1967. It was constructed with part of the
S$50 million 'blood debt' compensation paid by the Japanese government in
October 1966. Speaking at the unveiling ceremony, Lee said: We meet to
remember the men and women who were the hapless victims of one of the fires of
history... If today we remember these lessons of the past, we strengthen our
resolve and determination to make our future more secure then these men and
women for whom we mourn would not have died in vain. On 15 February every
year, memorial services (opened to the public) are held at the memorial. Sook
Ching Centre Monument The site of this monument lies within the Hong Lim
Complex in Chinatown. The inscription on the monument reads: The site was one
of the temporary registration centres of the Japanese Military Police, the
Kempeitai, for screening 'anti-Japanese' Chinese. On 18 February 1942, three
days after the surrender of Singapore, the Kempeitai launched a month-long
purge of 'anti-Japanese elements' in an operation named Sook Ching. All
Chinese men between 18 and 50 years old, and in some cases women and children,
were ordered to report to these temporary registration centers for
interrogation and identification by the Kempeitai. Those who passed the
arbitrary screening were released with 'Examined' stamped on their faces, arms
or clothes. Others, not so fortunate, were taken to outlying parts of
Singapore and executed for alleged anti-Japanese activities. Tens of thousands
were estimated to have lost their lives. For those who were spared, the Sook
Ching screening remains one of their worst memories of the Japanese
Occupation.— National Heritage Board. Changi Beach Massacre Monument The site
of this monument is located in Changi Beach Park (near Camp Site 2) in the
eastern part of Singapore. The inscription reads: 66 male civilians were
killed by Japanese Hojo Kempei (auxiliary military police) firing at the
water's edge on this stretch of Changi Beach on 20 February 1942. They were
among tens of thousands who lost their lives during the Japanese Sook Ching
operation to purge suspected anti-Japanese civilians among Singapore's Chinese
population between 18 February and 4 March 1942. Tanah Merah Besar Beach, a
few hundred meters south (now part of Singapore Changi Airport runway) was one
of the most heavily-used killing grounds where well over a thousand Chinese
men and youths lost their lives.— National Heritage Board. Punggol Beach
Massacre Monument The site of this monument is located off Punggol Road in
northeastern Singapore. The inscription on the monument reads: On 23 February
1942, some 300–400 Chinese civilians were killed along Punggol foreshore by
Hojo Kempei (auxiliary military police) firing squad. They were among tens of
thousands who lost their lives during the Japanese Sook Ching operation to
purge suspected anti-Japanese civilians among Singapore's Chinese population
between 18 February and 4 March 1942. The victims who perished along the
foreshore were among 1,000 Chinese males rounded up following a house-to-house
search of the Chinese community living along Upper Serangoon Road by Japanese
soldiers.— National Heritage Board. Popular culture The Japanese occupation of
Singapore has been depicted in media and popular culture, including films,
television series and books: Books The Singapore Grip (1978), a comic-dramatic
novel by J.G. Farrell about British merchant families in Singapore and their
complicated relationships with each other, other European expats, and other
residents, including Chinese immigrants. The novel culminates in the invasion
of the Malaysian peninsula and Singapore's occupation by the Japanese and
includes several vivid battle scenes written from the point of view of a
Japanese soldier in a tank battalion. Ovidia Yu's Su Lin series of mysteries,
beginning with The Frangipani Tree Mystery (2017), start off in 1930s
Singapore and continue into the period of Japanese occupation. Film Leftenan
Adnan (2000), a Malaysian film set in the Battle of Singapore Television
series Early episodes of Tenko, a BBC/ABC production. The Heroes (1988), an
Australian-British co-production. Heroes II: The Return (1991), an Australian
miniseries. The Last Rhythm (1996), a Chinese language series produced by the
Television Corporation of Singapore (TCS). The Price of Peace (1997), produced
by the TCS. A War Diary (2001), produced by MediaCorp. In Pursuit of Peace
(2001), produced by MediaCorp. Changi (2001), produced by the Australian
Broadcasting Corporation. The Journey: Tumultuous Times (2014), produced by
MediaCorp. The Forgotten Army - Azaadi Ke Liye (2020), produced by Kabir Khan
Films Pvt. Ltd. List of monuments and historical sites Civilian War Memorial
Kranji War Memorial and Cemetery Changi Chapel and Museum YMCA on Orchard Road
Alexandra Hospital grounds Old Ford Motor Factory See also History of
Singapore Japan–Singapore relations Bombing of Singapore (1944–45) List of
years in Singapore Hasuda Zenmei Notes References Bibliography Marius B.
Jansen (2002). The Making of Modern Japan. Harvard University Press. ISBN
978-0-674-03910-0. External links Fall of Malaya and Singapore, a detailed
history of the Battle of Singapore. Archive of The Syonan Times. The Syonan
Times substituted The Straits Times from 1942 to 1945 under several mastheads.

