The self-governance of Singapore was carried out in several stages. Since the
founding of Singapore in 1819, Singapore had been under the colonial rule of
the British. The first local elections on a limited scale for several
positions in the government of Singapore started in 1948 following an
amendment to the Constitution of Singapore. This was further amended with the
Rendel Constitution, strengthening local representation. Singapore was granted
full internal self-government in 1959, but the colonial administration still
controlled external relations and shared control of several key internal
policies such as internal security. In 1963, Singapore joined Malaysia,
relieving it of colonial rule and becoming an autonomous state within the
Malaysian federation. After a fallout in the relations between the United
Malays National Organisation (UMNO) and the People's Action Party (PAP), the
ruling parties of the Federation and Singapore respectively, full independence
came about with Singapore's expulsion from Malaysia in 1965. Yearning for
independence Following the end of the Japanese occupation of Singapore during
World War II, the British returned to power in Singapore. On 1 April 1946, the
Straits Settlements was dissolved and Singapore became a separate Crown colony
with a civil administration headed by a Governor. In July 1947, separate
Executive and legislative councils were established and the first local
election for six members of the Legislative Council was held in the 1948
Legislative Council elections. The Singapore Progressive Party (SPP), a
political party with a progressive platform of working with the British for
gradual reform and self-governance, won half of the seats. This was
technically a plurality, as independent candidates won the other three: the
SPP became the ruling party of the local representation. The majority of seats
were still appointed by the colonial administration. However, the early
political leaders in Singapore did not press for self-government. These early
leaders were organised into two main parties, the Malayan Democratic Union
(MDU) and the SPP. The MDU wanted Singapore to join the Federation of Malaya.
The SPP wanted eventual self-government, but was too comfortable with the
existing situation of cooperating with the British colonial government to set
a target date. The period after the war saw a political awakening amongst the
local populace and the rise of anti-colonial and nationalist sentiments,
epitomised by the slogan Merdeka, or "independence" in the Malay language. An
important anti-colonial incident was the Maria Hertogh riots. The British, on
their part, were prepared to embark on a program of gradually increasing self-
governance for Singapore and Malaya, although the British wanted to retain
control of Singapore because of Singapore’s important port facilities and
resources of rubber. The prospects for self-government or independence for
Singapore was initially deemed to be less than optimistic. Within Singapore
itself, there was little demand for self-government, let alone independence.
The communists were the only group that wanted the British to leave, and the
communist party was illegal. In fact, the independence movement led by the
communists convinced non-communists that British presence was needed to
prevent the communists from taking over the government. In 1953, a British
Commission, headed by Sir George Rendel, proposed a limited form of self-
government for Singapore. A new Legislative Assembly with twenty-five out of
thirty-two seats chosen by popular election would replace the Legislative
Council, from which a Chief Minister as head of government and Council of
Ministers as a cabinet would be picked under a parliamentary system. The
British would retain control over areas such as internal security and foreign
affairs, as well as veto power over legislation. The 1955 election for the
Legislative Assembly held on 2 April 1955 was a lively and closely fought
affair, with several newly formed political parties joining the fray. Unlike
previous elections, voters were automatically registered, expanding the
electorate to around 300,000. The SPP was soundly defeated in the election,
winning only four seats. The newly formed, left-leaning Labour Front was the
biggest winner with ten seats and it formed a coalition government with the
UMNO-MCA Alliance, which won two seats. Another new party, the leftist
People's Action Party (PAP), won three seats. Partial internal self-government
(1955–1959) The leader of the Labour Front, David Marshall, became the first
Chief Minister of Singapore. He presided over a shaky government, receiving
little co-operation from either the colonial government or the other local
parties. In May 1955, the Hock Lee Bus Riots broke out, killing four people,
and seriously discredited Marshall's government. The Chinese Middle School
riots broke out in 1956 among students in schools such as the Chinese High
School, further increasing the tension between the local government and the
Chinese students and unionists who were perceived. In April 1956, Marshall led
a delegation to London to negotiate for complete self-rule in the Merdeka
Talks, but the talks fell through due to British concerns about communist
influence and unrest and labour strikes from workers and from trade unions
which were undermining Singapore's economic stability. Marshall continued to
pressure the British, before declaring that if the British did not give
Singapore self-rule, he would resign. However, the British were unrelenting
and wanted to retain important control over Singapore's internal security.
Marshall resigned following the failure of the talk. His successor as Chief
Minister, Lim Yew Hock, launched a crackdown on communist and leftist groups,
imprisoning many trade union leaders and several pro-communist members of the
PAP under the Internal Security Act. The British government approved of Lim's
tough stance against communist agitators, and when a new round of talks was
held beginning 11 March 1957, they were amenable to granting almost complete
self-government, only retaining control over external security, and allowing
internal security to be an area of shared responsibility between the local
government and them. When the talks concluded on 11 April, it was agreed that
a State of Singapore would be created, with its own citizenship . Singapore
Citizenship Ordinance 1957 which commenced on 1 November 1957 provided
Singaporean citizenship to all people who were born in Singapore (except
children of diplomats and enemy aliens). People who were born in the
Federation of Malaya or citizens of the United Kingdom and Colonies who had
been resident for two years, and others who had been resident for eight years
were able to register or naturalise as Singaporean citizen. The Legislative
Assembly would be expanded to fifty-one members, entirely chosen by popular
election, and the Prime Minister and Cabinet would control all aspects of
government except defence and foreign affairs. On 1 August 1958, the State of
Singapore Act would be given royal assent after having been passed by the
Parliament on 24 July, providing for the establishment of the State of
Singapore. The British-appointed Governor was to be replaced by a Yang di-
Pertuan Negara, to represent Queen Elizabeth II, who remained titular head of
state. The British government would be represented by a Commissioner, who had
responsibility for defence and foreign policy, apart from trade and cultural
relations, and would preside over an Internal Security Council, consisting of
three members from the United Kingdom, three from Singapore (including the
Prime Minister) and one from the Federation of Malaya. Full internal self-
government (1959–1963) Elections for the new Legislative Assembly were held in
May 1959. This time round, the PAP swept the election, winning forty-three of
the fifty-one seats. They had accomplished this by courting the Chinese-
speaking majority, particularly those in the labour unions and radical student
organisations. The leader of the PAP, Lee Kuan Yew, became the first Prime
Minister of Singapore. The PAP's victory was viewed with dismay by foreign and
local business leaders. Although Lee and the other leaders of the PAP hailed
from the "moderate" wing of the party, many of the other members were
staunchly pro-communist. Many businesses promptly shifted their headquarters
from Singapore to Kuala Lumpur. Despite these ill omens, the PAP government
embarked on a vigorous program to address Singapore's various economic and
social problems. The plan for the economy was overseen by the capable Goh Keng
Swee, the new Minister of Finance, whose strategy was to encourage foreign and
local investment using a wide variety of measures, ranging from low tax rates
and tax holidays to the establishment of a new industrial estate in the Jurong
area. At the same time, the education system was revamped with the goal of
suiting the workforce to the needs of employers; more technical and vocational
schools were established, and English was promoted over Chinese as a language
of instruction. The long-standing problem of labour unrest was suppressed by
consolidating existing labour unions, sometimes forcibly, into a single
umbrella organisation, the National Trades Union Congress (NTUC), which was
closely affiliated with the government. On the social front, an attack was
launched on the long-standing housing problem by an aggressive and well-funded
public housing program, overseen by the Housing and Development Board (HDB).
Headed by the banker and industrialist Lim Kim San, the HDB constructed more
than 5,000 high-rise, low-cost apartments during its first two years of
operation. Campaign for Malaysia Despite their successes in governing
Singapore, the leaders of the PAP, including Lee and Goh, believed that
Singapore's future lay with Malaya. They felt that the historical and economic
ties between Singapore and Malaya were too strong for them to continue as
separate nations, and campaigned vigorously for a merger. On the other hand,
the sizeable pro-communist wing of the PAP were strongly opposed to the
merger, fearing a loss of influence; the government in Kuala Lumpur, headed by
ruling party United Malays National Organisation, was staunchly anti-
communist, and would support the PAP in such an event against them. The UMNO
leaders were also sceptical of the idea; there was some distrust of the PAP
government, and some were concerned that a merger with Singapore, with its
large urban Chinese population, would alter the racial balance on which their
political power base depended. The issue came to a head in 1961, when Ong Eng
Guan, a long-standing member of the PAP, stormed out of the party and beat a
PAP candidate in a subsequent by-election, a move that threatened to bring
down Lee's government. Faced with the prospect of a takeover by the pro-
communist wing of the PAP, UMNO did an about-face on the merger. On 27 May,
Malaya's Prime Minister, Tunku Abdul Rahman, mooted the idea of Malaysia,
comprising the existing Federation of Malaya, Singapore, Brunei and the
British Borneo territories of Sabah and Sarawak. They held to the idea that
the additional Malay population in the Borneo territories would offset
Singapore's Chinese population. The Malaysia proposal ignited the long-brewing
conflict between the moderates and pro-communists in the PAP. The pro-
communists, led by Lim Chin Siong, left the PAP to form a new opposition
party, the Barisan Sosialis (Socialist Front), to campaign against entry into
Malaysia under the conditions that the PAP wished. In response, Lee called for
a referendum on the merger, to be held in September 1962, and initiated a
vigorous campaign in advocation of their proposal of merger, possibly aided by
the fact that the government had a large influence over the media. The
referendum did not have an option of objecting to the idea of merger because
no one had raised the issue in the Legislative Assembly before then. However,
the method of merger had been debated, by the PAP, Singapore People's Alliance
and the Barisian Sosialis, each with their own proposals. The referendum was
called therefore, was to resolve this issue. The referendum called had three
options. Singapore could join Malaysia, but would be granted full autonomy and
only with fulfilment of conditions to guarantee that, which was option A. The
second option, option B, called for full integration into Malaysia without
such autonomy, with the status of any other state in Malaysia. The third
option, option C, was to enter Malaysia "on terms no less favourable than the
Borneo territories", noting the motive of why Malaysia proposed the Borneo
territories to join as well. Referendum on joining Malaysia After the
referendum was held, the option A received 70% of the votes in the referendum,
with 26% of the ballots left blank as advocated by the Barisan Sosialis to
protest against option A. The other two plans received less than two percent
each. Orders from Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew, Operation Coldstore was carried
out in Singapore in 2nd February 1963 with the arrest of more than 150
journalists, labor and student leaders, and members of political parties that
opposed Lee's People's Action Party (PAP). On 9 July 1963, the leaders of
Singapore, Malaya, Sabah , Sarawak and United Kingdom signed the Malaysia
Agreement to establish the Malaysia which was planned to come into being on 31
August. Tengku Abdul Rahman later changed the date to 16 September to allow
United Nations to complete a survey with people of Sabah and Sarawak on the
merger. On 31 August, Singapore declared its independence from the United
Kingdom, with Yusof bin Ishak as the head of state (Yang di-Pertuan Negara)
and Lee Kuan Yew as prime minister; sixteen days later, Singapore would join
the Federation of Malaysia. Singapore held polls for a general election as a
state of Malaysia five days after the merger in the 1963 state elections on 21
September 1963. The PAP won 71% of the seats, defeating the Barisan Sosialis,
but their popular vote had slipped to 46.9%. The difficulties of merger Due to
worsening PAP-UMNO relations, Singapore's status in Malaysia became
increasingly tense as time went on. Singapore retained its autonomy, but
differences in racial policy concerning issues of racial discrimination
affected Singapore. The UMNO backed Article 153 of the Constitution of
Malaysia, which gave the government of Malaysia power to enforce special
social and economic privileges for the Bumiputra, which were ethnically and
religiously defined. The PAP called for a Malaysian Malaysia, that favoured
all Malaysians, rather than specific ethnic groups. Singapore was also
required to pay the Federal Government a large percentage of its budget, money
which would not be necessarily returned as services towards Singapore. At the
same time, free trade was not granted between Singapore and other states of
Malaysia. Following these difficulties, Lee Kuan Yew reluctantly signed a
separation agreement on 7 August, after the Parliament of Malaysia voted for
Singapore's expulsion from the Federation. Singapore officially left Malaysia
on 9 August 1965. == References ==

