Singapore (Malay: Singapura), officially the State of Singapore (Malay: Negeri
Singapura), was one of the 14 states of Malaysia from 1963 to 1965. Malaysia
was formed on 16 September 1963 by the merger of the Federation of Malaya with
the former British colonies of North Borneo, Sarawak and Singapore. This
marked the end of the 144-year British rule in Singapore which began with the
founding of modern Singapore by Sir Stamford Raffles in 1819. At the time of
merger, it was the smallest state in the country by land area, but the largest
by population. The union was unstable due to distrust and ideological
differences between the leaders of Singapore and of the federal government of
Malaysia. They often disagreed about finance, politics and racial policies.
Singapore continued to face significant trade restrictions despite promises of
a common market in return for a large proportion of its tax revenues, and
retaliated by withholding loans to Sabah and Sarawak. In politics, the Malay-
based United Malays National Organisation (UMNO) and Singapore-based People's
Action Party (PAP), entered each other's political arenas, despite previous
agreements not to do so. These resulted in major race riots in Singapore in
1964, which were attributed (at least in part) to instigation by UMNO and its
Malay-language newspaper Utusan Melayu for affirmative action for Malays in
Singapore. These culminated in the decision by Malaysian Prime Minister Tunku
Abdul Rahman to expel Singapore from the Federation, and on 9 August 1965,
Singapore became independent. Prelude to merger Singapore politicians,
beginning with David Marshall in 1955, repeatedly courted Tunku Abdul Rahman
about merger with the Federation, but were rebuffed repeatedly. Tunku's chief
consideration was the need to maintain the racial balance in the Federation,
UMNO's position in the Alliance Party, and Malay political dominance.
Including Singapore with its large Chinese population would result in the
Chinese (at 3.6 million) outnumbering the 3.4 million Malays in the new union,
and put it "at-risk". Balanced against this risk was his even greater fear of
an independent Singapore outside the federation, particularly if it fell under
the control of an unfriendly government. As part of decolonisation and
increasing British disengagement from Malaya, constitutional talks on self-
government for Singapore between the British Colonial Office in London and the
Singapore Legislative Assembly had already resulted in the 1958 State of
Singapore Constitution, and a fully elected and self-governing 51-seat
Legislative Assembly in 1959. Tunku worried that the next round of
constitutional talks would grant Singapore even more independence and put the
island beyond his or Britain's reach; as British officials put it, a 'batik
curtain' would descend across the Straits of Johor, beyond which political
elements and possibly even a 'communist Cuba' would gather strength. This fear
became increasingly real to Tunku after 29 April 1961 when Ong Eng Guan of the
left-wing United Peoples' Party trounced the PAP candidate at the Hong Lim by-
election. Tunku was also worried about Indonesia, the other regional behemoth,
which under Sukarno's Guided Democracy was becoming increasingly nationalistic
and expansionist, undertaking regional actions such as the liberation of West
New Guinea. With these considerations in mind, and although it was not
apparent at the time, Tunku had already been considering merger as early as
June 1960. At a meeting of Commonwealth Prime Ministers, he mentioned to Lord
Perth of the Colonial Office that he was open to a merger if a 'Grand Design'
including not just Singapore but also British Borneo could be offered as some
sort of package deal. Not only would it greatly benefit the territory,
resources and population under his control, but the combination of indigenous
Bornean peoples and Peninsular Malays (collectively termed Bumiputera) would
counterbalance the increased numbers of Singaporean Chinese. On 27 May 1961 at
the Foreign Correspondents Association of Southeast Asia, Tunku announced that
a closer association between Malaya, Singapore and the Borneo territories was
a distinct possibility. Furthermore, he was calling not just for a customs
union but a full union into a single political entity, the Federation of
Malaysia. Referendum Malaysia Agreement Singapore-specific provisions
included: Singapore would retain control on education and labour. Defence,
external affairs and internal security would come under the jurisdiction of
the federal government Singapore would have only 15 seats in the federal
parliament instead of 25 seats (as was entitled by the size of its electorate)
in return for this increased autonomy Singapore would pay 40% of its total
revenue to the federal government. It would disburse a $150 million loan to
the Borneo territories, of which two-thirds would be interest-free for five
years. A common market would be implemented over twelve years. Singapore
citizens would become Malaysian citizens while retaining Singapore
citizenship, but they could only vote in Singapore. Merger The merger was
originally scheduled for 31 August 1963 to coincide with the official
independence day of Malaya. However, it was postponed by Tunku Abdul Rahman to
16 September 1963, to accommodate a United Nations mission to North Borneo and
Sarawak to ensure that they really wanted a merger, which was prompted by
Indonesian objections to the formation of Malaysia. Nonetheless, on 31 August
1963 (the original Malaysia Day), Lee Kuan Yew stood in front of a crowd at
the Padang in Singapore and unilaterally declared Singapore's independence. On
16 September 1963, coincidentally Lee's fortieth birthday, he once again stood
in front of a crowd at the Padang and this time proclaimed Singapore as part
of Malaysia. Pledging his loyalty to the Central Government, Tunku and his
colleagues, Lee asked for ‘an honourable relationship between the states and
the Central Government, a relationship between brothers, and not a
relationship between masters and servants'. Reasons for merger Independence
from Britain Singapore merged with Malaya to achieve independence from the
British colonial government. The British treatment of the locals since the
British colonisation of Singapore in 1819 and the British failure to defend
Singapore against Japanese invasion in February 1942 led to animosity and
disdain against the British colonial rule in the post-war years. These
sentiments culminated in strikes and riots in Singapore, such as the Hock Lee
Bus Riots and the Anti-National Service riots in the 1950s. By merging with
Malaya, the British would not have a reason to continue to rule over Singapore
and use the communist threat as an excuse to rule over Singapore. Only a
merger with Malaya would release Singapore from the clutches of British
colonial rule and grant it absolute independence from the British. Economic
security Singapore also wanted to merge with Malaya for economic reasons.
Singapore was facing serious unemployment problems in the early 1960s. By
merging with Malaya, Singapore believed to be able to overcome the
unemployment crisis. Unemployment became the most serious issue for the PAP
government when it assumed power to govern Singapore in 1959. The lack of
natural resources, the low literacy rate among the local population, and the
lack of hinterland caused the unemployment situation in Singapore to soar
during the early 1960s. Malaya was a large country blessed with natural
resources. Singapore wished to leverage Malaya's economic advantages by
proposing a common market strategy that would mutually benefit both nations.
The PAP administration believed that a merger would also provide the locals an
opportunity to find jobs in Malaya and thus alleviate the chronic unemployment
problem in Singapore. This policy eventually allowed the party to continue
their rule in Singapore. Anticommunism The merger was also proposed to
suppress communism in both Singapore and Malaya. The State of Emergency
imposed by the British in Singapore and Malaya from 1948 to 1960 is a
reflection of the strength of the communist movement, which was striving to
replace British rule of Singapore and Malaya with a communist government. The
Emergency Rule was lifted in 1960, but the anticommunist current in Southeast
Asia remained. Malaya sought to use the merger as a way to strengthen itself
and the region in their fight against communist influences. Post-merger
Economic disagreement The Singapore and federal governments disagreed over
economic issues. As part of the Malaysia Agreement, Singapore agreed to
contribute 40% of its total revenue to the federal government and provide
largely interest-free loans to Sabah and Sarawak, in exchange for
establishment of a common market. However in July 1965, Malaysian Finance
Minister Tan Siew Sin proposed raising the contribution to 60% and hinted
"that unless Singapore agrees to pay more, the common market would be slow in
coming about". This was refused by Singapore's Finance Minister, Goh Keng
Swee, who accused Kuala Lumpur of imposing tariffs on Singapore-made products.
Both sides also disagreed over the issuance of the loan, but agreed to refer
this issue to the World Bank for arbitration. Political disagreement The
Federal Government of Malaysia, dominated by the United Malays National
Organisation (UMNO), was concerned that as long as Singapore remained in the
Federation, the bumiputera policy of affirmative action in favor of Malays and
the indigenous population would be undermined and therefore run counter to its
agenda of addressing economic disparities between racial groups. This stance
clashed with the PAP's repeated pledges for a "Malaysian Malaysia" – the equal
treatment of all races in Malaysia by the government which should serve
Malaysian citizens without any regard for the economic conditions of any
particular race. Another contributing factor was fear that the economic
dominance of Singapore's port would inevitably shift economical and political
power away from Kuala Lumpur in time, should Singapore remain in the
Federation. Racial tensions Racial tensions increased dramatically within a
year. Despite the Malaysian government conceding citizenship to the many
Chinese immigrants after independence, the Chinese in Singapore disdained the
Federal policies of affirmative action, which granted special privileges to
the Malays in Article 153 of the Constitution of Malaysia. Financial and
economic benefits were given to Malays and Islam was recognised as the sole
official religion, although non-Muslims maintained freedom of worship. Malays
and Muslims in Singapore were being increasingly incited by the Federal
Government's accusations that the PAP was mistreating the Malays. Numerous
racial riots resulted, and curfews were frequently imposed to restore order.
These were collectively termed the 1964 race riots, the largest and deadliest
of which occurred on 21 July 1964. The immediate antecedent event was a speech
by Syed Jaafar Albar, backed by Federation Deputy Prime Minister Abdul Razak
Hussein, at the New Star Cinema in Pasir Panjang on 12 July 1964, where he
accused Lee Kuan Yew of being an oppressor and alleged that the fate of the
Malays was even worse than it was during the Japanese occupation. He declared
to an excited audience of several thousand Malays that "if there is unity, no
force in this world can trample us down... Not one Lee Kuan Yew, a thousand
Lee Kuan Yew... we finish them off". The crowd responded enthusiastically with
cries to arrest Lee and Othman Wok, and crush and kill them. Events escalated
over the following week, culminating in an article in the Utusan Melayu on 20
July 1964 titled 'Challenge to all Malays to all Malays – UMNO Youths; Lee
Kuan Yew Condemned; Teacher forced student to smell pork – Protest'. The day
after on 21 July 1964, racial riots broke out during the celebratory
procession of Muhammad's birthday near Kallang Gasworks, resulting in 4 deaths
and 178 injured at the end of that first day, and 23 deaths and 454 injuries
by the time the riot was quelled. More riots had broken out in September 1964.
The prices for food skyrocketed when the transportation system was disrupted
during the unrest, causing further hardship. The external political situation
was also tense at the time, with Indonesia actively against the establishment
of the Federation of Malaysia. President Sukarno of Indonesia declared a state
of Konfrontasi (Confrontation) against Malaysia, and initiated military and
other actions against the new nation, including the bombing of MacDonald House
in Singapore in March 1965 by Indonesian commandos which killed three people.
Indonesia also conducted seditious activities to provoke the Malays against
the Chinese. Separation On 7 August 1965, Prime Minister Tunku Abdul Rahman,
seeing no alternative to avoid further bloodshed, advised the Parliament of
Malaysia that it should vote to expel Singapore from Malaysia. Despite last-
ditch attempts by PAP leaders, including Lee Kuan Yew, to keep Singapore as a
state in the union, the Parliament on 9 August 1965 voted 126–0 in favour of
the expulsion of Singapore, with Members of Parliament from Singapore not
present. On that day, a tearful Lee announced that Singapore was a sovereign,
independent nation and assumed the role of Prime Minister of the new nation.
His speech included these words: "I mean for me it is a moment of anguish
because all my life… you see the whole of my adult life… I have believed in
merger and the unity of these two territories. You know it's a people
connected by geography, economics, and ties of kinship…" While it has
previously been taken as historical common knowledge that Singapore had been
expelled from Malaysia unilaterally by the Kuala Lumpur Government, recently
declassified documents from the Albatross File (taken from a 1980s interview
where Goh referred to merger with Malaysia as an "Albatross around [their]
necks"), revealed that as early as July 1964, negotiations had begun between
the PAP and the Alliance. In a handwritten letter, Lee Kuan Yew formally
authorised Goh Keng Swee to negotiate with Alliance leadership in order to
negotiate and plan the eventual exit of Singapore from the Federation, and
over the next year, the two parties coordinated to arrange matters such that
when the Tunku announced Singapore's expulsion and the PAP were "forced" to
establish an independent government, it would be presented as a "fait
accompli" that could not be jeopardised by popular uproar or opposition, which
was still in favour of merger. Having already reaped the political benefits of
Operation Coldstore, the crippling of the Singaporean Left, the detention of
key Barisan Sosialis leaders like Lim Chin Siong, Lee and Goh both believed
that this move would afford Singapore with the "best of both worlds", both
isolated from the communal turmoil which they believed would inevitably engulf
Malaysia while retaining the economic benefits of access to the Malaysian
markets. Under constitutional amendments passed in December that year, the new
state became the Republic of Singapore, with the vice-regal representative or
Yang di-Pertuan Negara, Yusof Ishak, becoming the first President, and the
Legislative Assembly becoming the Parliament of Singapore. These changes were
made retroactive to the date of Singapore's separation from Malaysia. The
Malaya and British Borneo dollar remained legal tender until the introduction
of the Singapore dollar in 1967. Before the currency split, there were
discussions about a common currency between the Malaysian and Singaporean
governments. Meanwhile in Malaysia, Singapore ceased to be represented in the
Federal Parliament, and its High Court remained part of the Federal Court
structure until 1969. Singapore's separation angered especially the political
leaders in Sabah and Sarawak, its two other nation-building partners, for not
being consulted by both the Federal Government and the Singapore State
Government. Among them, Chief Minister of Sabah Fuad Stephens, then known as
Donald Stephens, in his letter to Lee Kuan Yew said: "I feel like Death.
Tears, heartbreak and completely lost and betrayed. Never in my wildest dreams
did I see this happening." In the Upper House, Ong Kee Hui, chairman of the
Sarawak United Peoples' Party (SUPP) questioned the justification for
Malaysia's existence following Singapore's separation, adding that the
Malaysia Agreement is negotiated between all parties that formed the country.
Abdul Razak Hussein, Deputy Prime Minister of Malaysia, in his address to the
University of Malaya Graduates Society at the Arts Lecture Theatre in Pantai
Valley, Kuala Lumpur on 1 September 1965, denied the allegations and explained
that the decision was made and announced in secrecy due to the
Indonesia–Malaysia Confrontation. See also History of Malaysia Proclamation of
Malaysia PAP-UMNO relations History of the Republic of Singapore Independence
of Singapore Agreement 1965 Proclamation of Singapore References Further
reading Lim, Tin Seng. "Merger with Malaysia". Singapore Infopedia. National
Library Board. Retrieved 9 March 2020. Chan, Heng Chee (1971). Singapore: The
Politics of Survival, 1965–1967. Singapore; Kuala Lumpur: Oxford University
Press. OCLC 462273878. Lee, Kuan Yew (19 November 1961). "Transcript of
Recorded Press Conference by the Prime Minister, Mr. Lee Kuan Yew, Broadcast
over Radio Singapore at 7.10 p.m. on Sunday, November 19, 1961 [Singapore
Government Press Statement MC. No. 74/61/TTS]" (PDF). Government of Singapore
(archived on the National Archives of Singapore website). Archived from the
original (PDF) on 9 August 2014. (An interview with the Prime Minister of
Singapore regarding merger negotiations.) Lim, Siew Yea. "Communalism and
Communism at Singaporean Independence". Contemporary Postcolonial and
Postimperial Literature in English. Archived from the original on 21 August
2012. Retrieved 9 August 2014. Mohamed Noordin Sopiee (2005). From Malayan
Union to Singapore Separation: Political Unification in the Malaysia Region,
1945–65 (2nd ed.). Kuala Lumpur: University of Malaya Press. ISBN
978-9831001943. S'pore must merge with Malaya, Straits Times, 7 May 1952, 1.
(From
NewspaperSG)|url=https://eresources.nlb.gov.sg/newspapers/Digitised/Article/straitstimes19520507-1.2.21

