Singapore in the Straits Settlements refers to a period in the history of
Singapore between 1826 and 1942, during which Singapore was part of the
Straits Settlements together with Penang and Malacca. Singapore was the
capital and the seat of government of the Straits Settlement after it was
moved from George Town in 1832. From 1830 to 1867, the Straits Settlements was
a residency, or subdivision, of the Presidency of Bengal, in British India. In
1867, the Straits Settlements became a separate Crown colony, directly
overseen by the Colonial Office in Whitehall in London. The period saw
Singapore establish itself as an important trading port and developed into a
major city with a rapid increase in population. The city remained as the
capital and seat of government until British rule was suspended in February
1942, when the Imperial Japanese Army invaded Singapore during World War II.
Beginning of British rule in Singapore In 1819, the British official, Stamford
Raffles, landed in Singapore to establish a trading port. The island's status
as a British outpost was initially in doubt, as the Dutch government soon
issued bitter protests to the British government, arguing that their sphere of
influence had been violated. The British government and the East India Company
were initially worried about the potential liability of this new outpost, but
that was soon overshadowed by Singapore's rapid growth as an important trading
post. By 1822, it was made clear to the Dutch that the British had no
intention of giving up the island. The status of Singapore as a British
possession was cemented by the Anglo-Dutch Treaty of 1824, which carved up the
Malay archipelago between the two colonial powers. The area north of the
Straits of Malacca, including Penang, Malacca and Singapore, was designated as
the British sphere of influence, while the area south of the Straits was
assigned to the Dutch. This division had far-reaching consequences for the
region: modern-day Malaysia and Singapore correspond to the British area
established in the treaty, and modern-day Indonesia to the Dutch. In 1826,
Singapore was grouped together with Penang and Malacca into a single
administrative unit, the Straits Settlements, under the administration of the
East India Company. Residency of Bengal Presidency (1830–1867) In 1830, the
Straits Settlements became a residency, or subdivision, of the Presidency of
Bengal, in British India. This status continued until 1867. Trade and economy
During the subsequent decades, Singapore grew to become one of the most
important ports in the world. Several events during this period contributed to
its success. British intervention in the Malay peninsula from the 1820s
onwards culminated, during the 1870s, in the formation of British Malaya.
During this period, Malaya became an increasingly important producer of
natural rubber and tin, much of which was shipped out through Singapore.
Singapore also served as the administrative centre for Malaya until the 1880s,
when the capital was shifted to Kuala Lumpur. In 1834, the British government
ended the East India Company's monopoly on the China trade, allowing other
British companies to enter the market and leading to a surge in shipping
traffic. The trade with China was opened with the signing of the Unequal
Treaties, beginning in 1842. The advent of ocean-going steamships, which were
faster and had a larger capacity than sailing ships, reduced transportation
costs and led to a boom in trade. Singapore also benefited by acting as a
coaling station for the Royal Navy and merchant ships. The opening of the Suez
Canal in 1869 dramatically reduced the travel time from Europe to East Asia,
again providing a boost for trade. By 1880, over 1.5 million tons of goods
were passing through Singapore each year, with around 80% of it transported by
steamships and trading ships. The main commercial activity was entrepôt trade
which flourished under no taxation and little restriction. Many merchant
houses were set up in Singapore mainly by European trading firms, but also by
Jewish, Chinese, Arab, Armenian, American and Indian merchants. There were
also many Chinese middlemen who handled most of the trade between the European
and Asian merchants. Civil service Despite Singapore's growing importance, the
administration set up to govern the island was generally understaffed, poorly
funded, weak, and ineffectual. Administrators were usually posted from India
with little or no knowledge of the region, and were unfamiliar with local
languages and customs of the people. As long as British trade was not
affected, the administration was unconcerned with the welfare of the populace.
While Singapore's population had quadrupled between 1830 and 1867, the size of
the civil service in Singapore had remained unchanged. In 1850 there were only
twelve police officers to keep order in a city of nearly 60,000. Most people
had no access to public health services, and diseases such as cholera and
smallpox caused severe health problems, especially in overcrowded working-
class areas. Malnutrition and opium-smoking were major social woes during this
period. Society As early as 1827, the Chinese had become the largest ethnic
group in Singapore. During the earliest years of the settlement, most of the
Chinese in Singapore had been Peranakans, the descendants of Chinese who had
settled in the archipelago centuries ago, who were usually well-to-do
merchants. As the port developed, much larger numbers of Chinese coolies
flocked to Singapore looking for work. These migrant workers were generally
male, poor and uneducated, and had left China (mostly from southern China) to
escape the political and economic disasters in their country. They aspired to
make their fortune in Southeast Asia and return home to China, but most were
doomed to a life of low-paying unskilled labour. Until the 20th century, few
Chinese ended up settling permanently, primarily because wives were in short
supply. The sex ratio in Singapore's Chinese community was around hundred to
one, mainly due to restrictions that the Chinese government imposed, up until
the 1860s, on the migration of women. Malays in Singapore were the second
largest ethnic group in Singapore until the 1860s. Although many of the Malays
continued to live in kampungs, or the traditional Malay villages, most worked
as wage earners and craftsmen. This was in contrast to most Malays in Malaya,
who remained farmers. By 1860, Indians became the second largest ethnic group.
They consisted of unskilled labourers like the Chinese coolies, traders,
soldiers garrisoned at Singapore by the government in Calcutta, as well as a
number of Indian convicts who were sent to Singapore to carry out public works
projects, such as clearing jungles and swampy marshes and laying out roads.
They also helped construct many buildings, including St. Andrew's Cathedral,
and many Hindu temples. After serving their sentences, many convicts chose to
stay in Singapore. As a result of the administration's hands-off attitude and
the predominantly male, transient, and uneducated nature of the population,
the society of Singapore was rather lawless and chaotic. Prostitution,
gambling, and drug abuse (particularly of opium) were widespread. Chinese
criminal secret societies (analogous to modern-day triads) were extremely
powerful; some had tens of thousands of members, and turf wars between rival
societies occasionally led to death tolls numbering in the hundreds. Attempts
to suppress these secret societies had limited success, and they continued to
be a problem well into the 20th century. The colonial division of the
architecture of Singapore developed in this period, recognisable elements
which remain today in the form of shophouses, such as those found in Little
India or Chinatown. Crown colony (1867–1942) As Singapore continued to grow,
the deficiencies in the Straits Settlements administration became increasingly
apparent. Apart from the indifference of British India's administrators to
local conditions, there was immense bureaucracy and red tape which made it
difficult to pass new laws. Singapore's merchant community began agitating
against British Indian rule, in favour of establishing Singapore as a separate
colony of Britain. The British government finally agreed to make the Straits
Settlements a Crown colony on 1 April 1867, receiving orders directly from the
Colonial Office rather than from India. As a Crown Colony, the Straits
Settlements was ruled by a governor, based in Singapore, with the assistance
of executive and legislative councils. Although the councils were not elected,
more representatives for the local population were gradually included over the
years. Chinese protectorate The colonial government embarked on several
measures to address the serious social problems facing Singapore. For example,
a Chinese Protectorate under Pickering was established in 1877 to address the
needs of the Chinese community, including controlling the worst abuses of the
coolie trade and protecting Chinese women from forced prostitution. In 1889
Governor Sir Cecil Clementi Smith banned secret societies in colonial
Singapore, driving them underground. Nevertheless, many social problems
persisted up through the post-war era, including an acute housing shortage and
generally poor health and living standards. Tongmenghui In 1906, the
Tongmenghui, a revolutionary Chinese organisation dedicated to the overthrow
of the Qing dynasty led by Sun Yat-Sen, founded its Nanyang branch in
Singapore, which was to serve as the organisation's headquarters in Southeast
Asia. The Tongmenghui would eventually be part of several groups that took
part in the Xinhai Revolution and established the Republic of China. Overseas
Chinese like the immigrant Chinese population in Singapore donated generously
to groups like the Tongmenghui, which would eventually evolve into the
Kuomintang. Today, this founding is commemorated in the Sun Yat Sen Nanyang
Memorial Hall - previously known as Sun Yat Sen Villa or Wang Qing Yuan
(meaning "House of the Heavens above" in Chinese) - in Singapore where the
branch operated from. According to George Yeo, the Foreign Minister of
Singapore, in those days the Kuomintang party flag, which later became the
flag of the Republic of China, was sewn in the Sun Yat Sen Villa by Teo Eng
Hock and his wife. 1915 Singapore Mutiny Singapore was not directly affected
by the First World War (1914–18), as the conflict did not spread to Southeast
Asia. The most significant event during the war was a mutiny in 1915 by sepoys
of the 5th Light Infantry from British India who were garrisoned in Singapore.
On the day before the regiment was due to depart for Hong Kong, and hearing
rumours that they were to be sent to fight the Ottoman Empire, about half of
the Indian soldiers mutinied. They killed several of their officers and some
civilians before the mutiny was suppressed by British Empire and allied forces
plus local troops from Johore. Singapore in the 1920s and 1930s This is how
Lee Kuan Yew, its Prime Minister for 32 years, described Singapore: I grew up
in a Singapore of the 1920s and 1930s. The population was less than a million
and most of Singapore was covered by mangrove swamps, rubber plantations, and
secondary forest because rubber had failed, and forests around Mandai/Bukit
Timah took its place. In these early decades, the island was riddled with
opium houses and prostitution, and came to be widely monikered as "Sin-galore"
Naval base After the First World War, the British government devoted
significant resources to building a naval base in Singapore, as a deterrent to
the increasingly ambitious Japanese Empire. Originally announced in 1923, the
construction of the base proceeded slowly until the Japanese invasion of
Manchuria in 1931. When completed in 1939, at the very large cost of $500
million, the base boasted what was then the largest dry dock in the world, the
third-largest floating dock, and having enough fuel tanks to support the
entire British navy for six months. It was defended by heavy 15-inch naval
guns stationed at Fort Siloso, Fort Canning and Labrador, as well as a Royal
Air Force airfield at Tengah Air Base. Winston Churchill touted it as the
"Gibraltar of the East" and military discussions often referred to the base as
simply "East of Suez" The base did not have a fleet. The British Home Fleet
was stationed in Europe, and the British could not afford to build a second
fleet to protect its interests in Asia. The so-called Singapore strategy
called for the Home Fleet to sail quickly to Singapore in the event of an
emergency. However, after World War II broke out in 1939, the fleet was fully
occupied with defending Britain, and only the small Force Z was sent to defend
the colony. People in Singapore who held German identify papers, including
Jews fleeing the Nazis such as Karl Duldig, Slawa Duldig, and Eva Duldig, were
arrested and deported from Singapore. The British colonial government
classified them as "citizens of an enemy country". See also Secret societies
in colonial Singapore References Further reading Firaci, Biagio (10 June
2014). "Sir Thomas Stamford Raffles and the British Colonization of Singapore
among Penang, Melaka and Bencoonen".

